[comment]: # (File naming convention: SML_UserDocs_<MethodName>_<Lang>.md )
[comment]: # (Lang abbreviates to: Py / PySpk / R )


# Selective Editing in Python

# Method Description

### Overview

 | Descriptive      | Details                                                  |
 |:---              | :----                                                    |
 | Support Area     | Methodology - Editing & Imputation                       | 
 | Method Theme     | Editing                                                  |
 | Status           | Ready to Use                                             |
 | Inputs           | Reference, question list, adjusted return, predicted value, auxillary predicted value, standardising factor, design weight, threshold |
 | Outputs          | Reference, Score1, ScoreM, Final_Score, Selective Editing Marker, Predicted Marker |
 | Method Version   | 1.1.0                                           |

### Summary

Selective Editing is an internationally recognised editing method where potential errors are prioritised according to their expected impact on key outputs. 
Selective Editing assigns a score to specified variables where the score reflects the impact that editing the respondent will have on the estimates. 
Contributors with a score above a predetermined threshold are flagged for manual review to be validated, while contributors with a score below the threshold pass through unchecked.

### Terminology

- Contributor reference - Unique identifier assigned to each respondent.
- Adjusted return - The most recent unedited returned data
  value (for a given variable) in the current period, t.
- Predicted value - The first predictor value (for a given
  variable) for the current period adjusted return.
- Auxiliary predicted value - This is the secondary
  predictor (for a given variable) for the current
  period adjusted return.
- Standardising factor - The domain group estimate used to
  standardise scores within a given domain group.
- Design weight - An a-weight, generated by another
  method.
- Selective Editing domain group - Indicates which Selective
  Editing domain group a given respondent belongs to.
- Selective Editing threshold - Unique threshold for each domain group 
  against which the selected editing score is compared.  
- Combining function - If the method is applied to more than
  one variable, then the scores can be combined in the
  following ways: Average, Sum, Max, Weighted mean, Minkowski.

### Statistical Process Flow / Formal Definition

A selective editing score is calculated for each reporting unit i in
time t. The selective editing score is calculated by multiplying the
design weight by the modulus of the adjusted return for reporting unit
i at time t by the predicted value for reporting unit i at time t,
divided by the standardising factor, and all multiplied by 100 as shown
by the equation below.

```asciimath
Score = 100*{{a-weight*|current value-predicted value|}/Standardising factor}
```

The predicted value is a clean response (i.e. free from
error adjusted return) for reporting unit i at time t-1. However, if
a clean response for reporting unit i at time t-1 is not available
then imputed or constructed previous period data is used. If this
value isn't available, then the auxiliary predicted value for reporting
unit i at time t is used.

The standardising factor is the weighted domain estimate for a given
variable at time t-1, which is used to determine a
respondent's potential impact on key output estimates.

**Combining Scores**

If selective editing is applied to more than one variable, then a final score is calculated using
one of the following combination methods:

* Maximum score: The maximum score of all the variables.
* Weighted mean score: Where each score is multiplied by a weight, where
  all weights will add up to 1.
* Mean score: Where all scores are added up and divided by the number of
  scores.
* Minkowski distance: Each variable's score is multiplied to the power of p. All the scores are then summed and multiplied to the
 power of 1/p, where p >= 1 and is an integer. 
  
**Generate selective editing marker**

Each final score is compared to the threshold associated with
the respondent's domain group.

If the final score is greater than or equal to the selective editing
threshold, then the selective editing marker for the reporting
unit is marked False and the respondent requires
validation.

If the final score is less than the selective editing threshold, the selective editing marker for 
the reporting unit is marked True and the respondent does not require validation.


### Assumptions & Vailidity

- All data inputs required by the method are available and are on a
  standardised basis.
- The predicted variable and auxiliary predicted value should both
  be good predictors of the returned data for time t.
- The predicted value in the score calculation must have been cleaned
  and free from errors. This is not limited to genuine returns, and
  it may be an imputed or constructed value if a clean response is
  not available.
- Each respondent is clearly classified into one mutually exclusive
  domain group.
- The thresholds specified are valid and appropriate (>0)


# User Notes

### Finding and Installing the method 

**This method requires Python >=3.7.1, <4.0.0 and uses the Pandas package >=1.3.5, <=v1.5.3.**

If you are using Pandas >=2.0 this will be uninstalled and v1.5.3 installed.

><sub>To prevent downgrading software on your system, we recommend creating a virtual environment to install and run SML methods. This will enable you to install the method with the required version of Python, etc, without disrupting the newer versions you may be running on your system. If you’re new to virtual environments, please see our guidence on installing a method in the Help centre of our SML website to get started. Otherwise, use your preferred method to create a virtual environment with the correct software versions.</sub>


The method package can be installed from Artifactory/PyPI using the following code in the terminal or command prompt:

```py
pip install sml_small 
```

In your code you can import the method using:

```py
import sml_small.selective_editing as seled
```

### Requirements and Dependencies 

This method requires input data supplied as a Pandas dataframe.  


### Assumptions and Validity 

- The method will automatically assign adjusted return (ar), predicted value (pv), auxiliary predicted
value (apv) and standardising factor (sf) based on the column names of the inputs. 
- Unless otherwise noted, fields must not contain Null values. 
- If the "weighted mean score" is selected to combine score, then the
  sum of the weights provided should total to 1.

## How to Use the Method

Once the selective editing method is available on your computer you will be
able to call the method and perform selective editing on a dataset. 

The input dataset will need to contain a specific suffix structure for each question used in
calculating the score. The adjusted return value will have '_ar', the
predicted value will have '_pv', the auxiliary predicted value will
have '_apv', the standardising factor will have '_sf' and the weight
(if weighted scores are chosen) will have '_wt', where the sum of '_wt'
has to add up to 1.

### Method Input

Input records must include the following fields of the
correct types:

- reference (any type): Unique to each respondent. 
- design_weight (numeric): Also known as the a-weight. 
- threshold (numeric): The selective editing threshold. This is unique for
each domain and is specified by Methodology. 
- question_1_ar (numeric): This is the adjusted return for question 1. The adjusted
return has usually been through other editing strategies before Selective
Editing. 
- question_1_pv (numeric): This is the predicted value for question 1, usually the
respondent's value from the previous period. 
- question_1_apv (numeric): This is the auxiliary predicted variable used when
there is not a previous period value available. 
- question_1_sf (numeric): This is the standardising factor, which is the weighted
domain estimate for the previous period. 
- question_1_wt (numeric): This column is a weight column, which is used when the
weighted option is used as the combination method. 


**Example**

 | Reference | design_weight | threshold | question_1_ar | question_1_pv | question_1_apv | question_1_sf | question_1_wt |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 49900001 | 20 | 0.6 | 800 | | 424 | 800000 | 1 |
| 49900002 | 20 | 0.6 | 656 | 390 | 259 | 800000 | 1 |
| 49900003 | 20 | 0.6 | 997 | 773 | 912 | 800000 | 1 |
| 49900004 | 20 | 0.6 | 676 |  | 334 | 800000 | 1 |
| 49900005 | 20 | 0.6 | 632 | 871 | 684 | 800000 | 1 |
| 49900006 | 20 | 0.6 | 985 | 345 | 312 | 800000 | 1 |
| 49900007 | 20 | 0.6 | 468 | 963 | 773 | 800000 | 1 |
| 49900008 | 20 | 0.6 | 772 | 733 | 833 | 800000 | 1 |
| 49900009 | 20 | 0.6 | 621 | 673 | 898 | 800000 | 1 |
| 49900010 | 20 | 0.6 | 736 | 377 | 646 | 800000 | 1 |
   

### Method Output 

Output records will contain the following new fields:


- question_1_s: This is the score for question 1. 
- question_1_pm: This is a predicted marker, which indicates whether the predicted value (True) or 
  the auxiliary value (False) has been used.
- Final_score: The score after a combination method is applied to multiple variables (if used). This
  is the value that is compared to the threshold.
- Selective_edting_marker: If the respondent needs to be contacted for validation, the marker will be False (i.e., the score
  is >= the threshold value). If the respondent does not need to be contacted, the marker will be True. 



**Example**

| Reference | design_weight | threshold | question_1_ar | question_1_pv | question_1_apv | question_1_sf | question_1_s | question_1_pm | final_score | selective_editing_marker
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 49900001 | 20 | 0.6 | 800 | | 424 | 800000 | 0.94 | FALSE | 0.94 | FALSE |
| 49900002 | 20 | 0.6 | 656 | 390 | 259 | 800000 | 0.665 | TRUE | 0.665 | FALSE |
| 49900003 | 20 | 0.6 | 997 | 773 | 912 | 800000 | 0.56 | TRUE | 0.56 | TRUE |
| 49900004 | 20 | 0.6 | 676 |  | 334 | 800000 | 0.855 | FALSE | 0.855 | FALSE |
| 49900005 | 20 | 0.6 | 632 | 871 | 684 | 800000 | 0.5975 | TRUE | 0.5975 | TRUE |
| 49900006 | 20 | 0.6 | 985 | 345 | 312 | 800000 | 1.6 | TRUE | 1.6 | FALSE |
| 49900007 | 20 | 0.6 | 468 | 963 | 773 | 800000 | 1.2375 | TRUE | 1.2375 | FALSE |
| 49900008 | 20 | 0.6 | 772 | 733 | 833 | 800000 | 0.0975 | TRUE | 0.0975 | TRUE |
| 49900009 | 20 | 0.6 | 621 | 673 | 898 | 800000 | 0.13 | TRUE | 0.13 | TRUE |
| 49900010 | 20 | 0.6 | 736 | 377 | 646 | 800000 | 0.8975 | TRUE | 0.8975 | FALSE |



Note that in this example, References 49900001 and 49900004 do not have predicted values available for the
score calculation. You can see the blank cells for the predicted values and question_1_pm is False.  This shows that the auxillary value is used for these respondents. The rest of the respondents have the predicted value
available and therefore, question_1_pm is True.

### Example (Synthetic) Data

Files containing the example input and output data given above can be found in the GitHub repo https://github.com/ONSdigital/sml-supporting-info/tree/main/method-info/selective-editing/example-data.

Input data:

    selective_editing_input_data_example_1.csv
    
Expected output after running the worked example:

    selective_editing_output_data_example_1.csv


## Worked Example


```py
import pandas as pd
import sml_small.selective_editing as seled

# Location of csv file
datafile = "selective_editing_input_data_example_1.csv"

# Read in csv file above
df = pd.read_csv(datafile)

# Call the Selective Editing method
output = seled.selective_editing(input_dataframe = df, # DataFrame of the test data (above)
                                 reference_col = 'reference', # Reference column
                                 design_weight_col = 'design_weight', # Design weight column
                                 threshold_col = 'threshold', # Threshold column
                                 question_list = ['question_1'], # Question(s) we are performing Selective Editing on
                                 combination_method = 'maximum', # Type combination, will accept 'maximum', 'mean', 'weighted', 'minkowski', default = maximum
                                 minkowski_distance = 0, # Set to 0 if minkowski is not selected. Set to value of p if minkowski is selected above. 
                                 show_sums = 0) # Provides additional data on score calculations
                                 
output.to_csv("selective_editing_output_data_example_1.csv")
```

The output gets exported as a .csv file, which will be saved in your working directory.

### Treatment of Special Cases 

- Fields should not contain Null values


### Additional Information

The ONS Statistical Methods Library at https://statisticalmethodslibrary.ons.gov.uk/ 
contains:
- Further information about the methods including a link to the GitHub repository which contains detailed API information as part of the method code.
- Information about other methods available through the library.


### License

Unless stated otherwise, the SML codebase is released under the MIT License. This covers both the codebase and any sample code in the documentation.

The documentation is available under the terms of the Open Government 3.0 license.
